README.md, before:

# My `~/linux` infrastructure

This is a collection of scripts and notes that I use for Linux kernel
development.

## Top-level directories

- `bin`: scripts that I add to my `$PATH`
- `configs`: kernel configs
- `modules`: experimental/testing kernel modules
- `notes`: various development notes
- `packages`: Arch Linux packages used for development
- `scripts`: tests, bug reproducers, and other one-off scripts

## VM Setup

I use QEMU for kernel development. My setup allows for running kernels straight
off of the host system without installing onto the guest, which makes for a
super fast edit-compile-test cycle.

### `vm.py`

`vm.py` is my VM management script. It fills a role similar to that of
something like libvirt but is much simpler.

Each VM has its own directory under a top-level VM directory containing all of
its disk images and its configuration file.

`vm.py create` creates a new VM under the top-level VM directory. A few basic
configuration options (CPUs, memory, disk size) can be given. The new VM only
has a virtio-net NIC, a (blank) virtio-blk root disk, and a serial console.

The configuration file for each VM is named `config.py`. It's a Python script
which must define a `qemu_options` list and `kernel_cmdline` list. It may also
define a `qemu_arch` string.

`vm.py run` runs a VM. Arbitrary QEMU options may be added to those in the
configuration. The killer feature, however, is the `-k` option: this runs the
VM with a kernel from the host machine.

`vm.py archinstall` installs and configures Arch Linux on a new VM. It
automatically downloads the latest Arch Linux ISO and runs an automated setup
process. If there is an error during this process, you will be dropped into a
shell on the VM. If this happens, you can edit `install.sh` on the VM and try
again manually (but please also open an issue on GitHub so I can fix it). If
the installation process succeeds, the VM will power off, after which you can
restart it with `vm.py run`. The default username and password are `vmuser`.

#### Configuration

`vm.py` may be configured in `~/.config/vmpy.conf`:

```ini
[Paths]
# Top-level VM directory. Defaults to "~/vms".
VMs=~/vms
# Directory to download installer ISOs to. Defaults to "iso" directory under
# the VMs directory.
ISOs=~/Downloads
# Directory to look in for `vm.py run -k`. Unset by default.
Builds=~/builds
```

#### Running Custom Kernel Builds

Running a custom kernel build on a VM usually requires installing that kernel
on the VM. This is wasteful and slow. Instead, I use a combination of QEMU's
`-kernel` option and VirtFS to allow booting a kernel straight off of the host
system.

QEMU's `-kernel` option boots the VM straight into a kernel image. This,
however, doesn't handle kernel modules. For that, `vm.py` provides a VirtFS to
the guest containing the modules, which the guest mounts while booting (see
`scripts/vm-modules-mounter.service`). `vm.py archinstall` automatically
installs `vm-modules-mounter`. You can install it manually by copying
`vm-modules-mounter.service` to `/etc/systemd/system` and running `systemctl
enable vm-modules-mounter.service`.

Note that this setup requires a few kernel configuration options; see
[`configs/vmpy.fragment`](configs/vmpy.fragment).

## Kconfig Setup

I keep my kernel build configuration files in the [`configs`](configs)
directory. Rather than keeping full, generated config files, which are noisy
and hard to manage, I keep configuration "fragments" with only the
configuration options I care about and use [`kconfig.py`](bin/kconfig.py) to
merge them.

`kconfig.py` also augments configuration files with an `include` command that
reads another configuration file and inserts it into the current file verbatim.
For example, suppose we have the following files:

`file1.config`:
```
CONFIG_FOO=y
CONFIG_BAR=m

include "file3.config"

CONFIG_BAZ=y
```

`file2.config`:
```
CONFIG_QUX=m
```

`file3.config`:
```
CONFIG_FOO=m
CONFIG_BAZ=m
CONFIG_QUX=y
```

`kconfig.py file1.config file2.config` would produce a configuration file with
`CONFIG_FOO=m`, `CONFIG_BAR=m`, `CONFIG_BAZ=y`, and `CONFIG_QUX=m`.

Included filenames are interpreted relative to the current file.

Finally, `kconfig.py` checks the generated configuration file to make sure that
all options were set as desired (which may not be the case if some dependencies
were not satisfied, for example).

Commit message:

kconfig.py: add command to disable checking some options
metaconfig.py used to have a distinction between the defconfig and
fragments, and it ignored options from the defconfig that didn't make it
into the final config. This is useful because the defconfig contains
lots of config options that were copied from a distro config and we
don't really care about. Instead of reintroducing an idea of defconfig
to kconfig.py, add a way to explicitly disable checking for a region of
a config file.

README.md, after:

# My `~/linux` infrastructure

This is a collection of scripts and notes that I use for Linux kernel
development.

## Top-level directories

- `bin`: scripts that I add to my `$PATH`
- `configs`: kernel configs
- `modules`: experimental/testing kernel modules
- `notes`: various development notes
- `packages`: Arch Linux packages used for development
- `scripts`: tests, bug reproducers, and other one-off scripts

## VM Setup

I use QEMU for kernel development. My setup allows for running kernels straight
off of the host system without installing onto the guest, which makes for a
super fast edit-compile-test cycle.

### `vm.py`

`vm.py` is my VM management script. It fills a role similar to that of
something like libvirt but is much simpler.

Each VM has its own directory under a top-level VM directory containing all of
its disk images and its configuration file.

`vm.py create` creates a new VM under the top-level VM directory. A few basic
configuration options (CPUs, memory, disk size) can be given. The new VM only
has a virtio-net NIC, a (blank) virtio-blk root disk, and a serial console.

The configuration file for each VM is named `config.py`. It's a Python script
which must define a `qemu_options` list and `kernel_cmdline` list. It may also
define a `qemu_arch` string.

`vm.py run` runs a VM. Arbitrary QEMU options may be added to those in the
configuration. The killer feature, however, is the `-k` option: this runs the
VM with a kernel from the host machine.

`vm.py archinstall` installs and configures Arch Linux on a new VM. It
automatically downloads the latest Arch Linux ISO and runs an automated setup
process. If there is an error during this process, you will be dropped into a
shell on the VM. If this happens, you can edit `install.sh` on the VM and try
again manually (but please also open an issue on GitHub so I can fix it). If
the installation process succeeds, the VM will power off, after which you can
restart it with `vm.py run`. The default username and password are `vmuser`.

#### Configuration

`vm.py` may be configured in `~/.config/vmpy.conf`:

```ini
[Paths]
# Top-level VM directory. Defaults to "~/vms".
VMs=~/vms
# Directory to download installer ISOs to. Defaults to "iso" directory under
# the VMs directory.
ISOs=~/Downloads
# Directory to look in for `vm.py run -k`. Unset by default.
Builds=~/builds
```

#### Running Custom Kernel Builds

Running a custom kernel build on a VM usually requires installing that kernel
on the VM. This is wasteful and slow. Instead, I use a combination of QEMU's
`-kernel` option and VirtFS to allow booting a kernel straight off of the host
system.

QEMU's `-kernel` option boots the VM straight into a kernel image. This,
however, doesn't handle kernel modules. For that, `vm.py` provides a VirtFS to
the guest containing the modules, which the guest mounts while booting (see
`scripts/vm-modules-mounter.service`). `vm.py archinstall` automatically
installs `vm-modules-mounter`. You can install it manually by copying
`vm-modules-mounter.service` to `/etc/systemd/system` and running `systemctl
enable vm-modules-mounter.service`.

Note that this setup requires a few kernel configuration options; see
[`configs/vmpy.fragment`](configs/vmpy.fragment).

## Kconfig Setup

I keep my kernel build configuration files in the [`configs`](configs)
directory. Rather than keeping full, generated config files, which are noisy
and hard to manage, I keep configuration "fragments" with only the
configuration options I care about and use [`kconfig.py`](bin/kconfig.py) to
merge them.

`kconfig.py` also augments configuration files with an `include` command that
reads another configuration file and inserts it into the current file verbatim.
For example, suppose we have the following files:

`file1.config`:
```
CONFIG_FOO=y
CONFIG_BAR=m

include "file3.config"

CONFIG_BAZ=y
```

`file2.config`:
```
CONFIG_QUX=m
```

`file3.config`:
```
CONFIG_FOO=m
CONFIG_BAZ=m
CONFIG_QUX=y
```

`kconfig.py file1.config file2.config` would produce a configuration file with
`CONFIG_FOO=m`, `CONFIG_BAR=m`, `CONFIG_BAZ=y`, and `CONFIG_QUX=m`.

Included filenames are interpreted relative to the current file.

Finally, `kconfig.py` checks the generated configuration file to make sure that
all options were set as desired (which may not be the case if some dependencies
were not satisfied, for example). This can be disabled with the `silent`
command and reenabled with the `endsilent` command:

`file.config`:
```
silent
CONFIG_THAT_MAY_NOT_EXIST=y
endsilent
CONFIG_FOO=m
```
