notes/qemu.adoc, before:

= QEMU Notes

== Enabling KVM

If `/dev/kvm` doesn't exist, check dmesg for a line like:

----
[   24.781959] kvm: disabled by bios
----

Enable virtualization support in BIOS.

== Installing on QEMU from an ISO

----
vm.py $VM -- -boot d -cdrom $ISO -no-reboot
----

== GRUB and TTY on Serial Console

Edit `/etc/default/grub`:

----
GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT="quiet console=ttyS0,115200"
# Remove GRUB_TERMINAL_{INPUT,OUTPUT}
GRUB_TERMINAL=serial
GRUB_SERIAL_COMMAND="serial --speed=115200"
----

And run `grub-mkconfig -o /boot/grub/grub.cfg`.

== Host Forwarding to QEMU

To forward port 2222 on the host to port 22 on the VM, start QEMU with:

----
-netdev user,id=vlan0,hostfwd=tcp::2222-:22 -device virtio-net,netdev=vlan0
----

== Accessing the Host's USB Devices

A QEMU guest can access the host's USB devices. QEMU uses libusb to access the USB device node directly.

For example, to access my USB SATA enclosure, I do the following.

First, remove the disks from the host just to be safe:

----
$ for dev_delete in /sys/block/sd[b-e]/device/delete; do
	sudo sh -c "echo 1 > ${dev_delete}"
done
----

Then, find the bus and device number of the enclosure:

----
$ lsusb
...
Bus 002 Device 004: ID 152d:0567 JMicron Technology Corp. / JMicron USA Technology Corp. JMS567 SATA 6Gb/s bridge
...
$ bus=002
$ device=004
----

Make it owned by myself so I don't have to run QEMU as root:

----
$ sudo chown osandov:users "/dev/bus/usb/${bus}/${device}"
----

Then run QEMU with

----
-usb -device nec-usb-xhci,id=xhci -device "usb-host,hostbus=${bus},hostaddr=${device}"
----

`-usb` creates a USB 2 hub, `-device nec-usb-xhci,id=xhci` creates a USB 3 hub, and `-device usb-host` attaches the device.

Commit message:

vm.py: disable default QEMU devices in default config

notes/qemu.adoc, after:

= QEMU Notes

== Enabling KVM

If `/dev/kvm` doesn't exist, check dmesg for a line like:

----
[   24.781959] kvm: disabled by bios
----

Enable virtualization support in BIOS.

== Installing on QEMU from an ISO

----
vm.py $VM -- -boot d -cdrom $ISO -no-reboot
----

== Graphics

By default, `vm.py` disables graphics with `-nodefaults` and `-nographic`. However, this can be reenabled with the `-vga` and `-display` flags. QEMU's default card is `cirrus`, but here's how to use the virtio VGA card:

----
-vga virtio -display sdl
----

== GRUB and TTY on Serial Console

Edit `/etc/default/grub`:

----
GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT="quiet console=ttyS0,115200"
# Remove GRUB_TERMINAL_{INPUT,OUTPUT}
GRUB_TERMINAL=serial
GRUB_SERIAL_COMMAND="serial --speed=115200"
----

And run `grub-mkconfig -o /boot/grub/grub.cfg`.

== Host Forwarding to QEMU

To forward port 2222 on the host to port 22 on the VM, start QEMU with:

----
-netdev user,id=vlan0,hostfwd=tcp::2222-:22 -device virtio-net,netdev=vlan0
----

== Accessing the Host's USB Devices

A QEMU guest can access the host's USB devices. QEMU uses libusb to access the USB device node directly.

For example, to access my USB SATA enclosure, I do the following.

First, remove the disks from the host just to be safe:

----
$ for dev_delete in /sys/block/sd[b-e]/device/delete; do
	sudo sh -c "echo 1 > ${dev_delete}"
done
----

Then, find the bus and device number of the enclosure:

----
$ lsusb
...
Bus 002 Device 004: ID 152d:0567 JMicron Technology Corp. / JMicron USA Technology Corp. JMS567 SATA 6Gb/s bridge
...
$ bus=002
$ device=004
----

Make it owned by myself so I don't have to run QEMU as root:

----
$ sudo chown osandov:users "/dev/bus/usb/${bus}/${device}"
----

Then run QEMU with

----
-usb -device nec-usb-xhci,id=xhci -device "usb-host,hostbus=${bus},hostaddr=${device}"
----

`-usb` creates a USB 2 hub, `-device nec-usb-xhci,id=xhci` creates a USB 3 hub, and `-device usb-host` attaches the device.
